Enhance developer docs on primitive validation and developer documents for debugging AaC via Gitpod (#557)
DevOps-MBSE/AaC: docs/docs/dev_guide/validation_plugins.md

Reviewer: I don't know that it makes sense to include code in these docs unless we can do it dynamically by placing a link that actually displays the code at that link (similar to what GitHub does when you put a link to a source file with line numbers, etc) or populate it with a separate tool, etc. Otherwise, we will have to remember to update code in documentation whenever it gets updated in the actual module, etc.

Author: Yeah, but I still think there is value in referencing the code. Let's look for a dynamic solution and consider this a stop-gap.

Reviewer: Created #592 to address this.

# Validation Plugins for Developers

## Plugin-provided Validations

> AaC's validation system leverages the larger AaC plugin system to provide a plug-an-play system for creating structural and primitive type validations (constrains) that are used to determine errors and possible issues in systems modeled in AaC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AaC's approach to validation leverages the larger AaC plugin mechanism to provide a plug-and-play system for creating structural and primitive type validations (constraints) that are used to detect errors and possible issues in systems modeled with AaC.
```

> AaC hsa two classes of plugin-provided validations: definition validations and primitive validations. The [definition validations](#definition-validations) are used to validate the structural parts of definitions such as required fields while [primitive validations](#primitive-validations) check that values in primitive fields adhere to the expectations of the data type such as checking that values listed as integers are in fact integers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AaC makes use of two classes of plugin-provided validations: definition validations and primitive validations. The [definition validations](#definition-validations) are used to validate the structural parts of definitions such as required fields while [primitive validations](#primitive-validations) check that values in primitive fields adhere to the expectations of the data type such as checking that values listed as integers are, in fact, integers.
```

There is also a section listing out the `validation` plugin for the implementation of a validator plugin for 1st and/or 3rd party plugins

> <!-- * [Implementation of a Validation Plugin for Definitions](#implementation-of-a-validation-plugin-for-definitions) -->

Reviewer: Is this intended to be commented out?

Author: Nope. Thanks for catching it!

Author: ```suggestion
```

     sub_structure_definitions = get_definition_schema_components(definition, language_context)
     all_applicable_definitions = ancestor_definitions + sub_structure_definitions

     # For every identified sub-structure that is defined by another schema definition, validate it per its corresponding validations
     for target_schema_definition in all_applicable_definitions:
         sub_definition_validations = target_schema_definition.get_validations()

         if sub_definition_validations:
             for validation in sub_definition_validations:
                 validation_name = validation.get(DEFINITION_FIELD_NAME)
                 validator_plugin = list(filter(lambda plugin: plugin.name == validation_name, applicable_validator_plugins))

                 if validator_plugin:
                     # Add the validation results to the overall collection of validation results
                     validator_results.append(
                         _apply_validator(definition, target_schema_definition, language_context, validator_plugin[0])
                     )

     validator_results.append(_validate_primitive_types(definition, language_context))

>      return validator_results

Reviewer: I think we should just link to this as it'd be too easy for this snippet to get out of sync with the actual implementation.

Reviewer: Captured in #592

***NOTE***: Without the `implementation_file` the initial validator plugin will spit out an error saying that an implementation file is missing. This is needed for the validator plugin to function properly.

## Implementation of a Validation Plugin for Primitive Types

Examples of a primitive validator plugin can be found by refering the first-party provider for primitive validations [primitive-type-check](https://github.com/jondavid-black/AaC/tree/main/python/src/aac/plugins/first_party/primitive_type_check)

> Looking inside this directory the structure of this plugin looks other AaC plugins:

Reviewer: I'm not sure what exactly to put here because I don't know exactly what is supposed to be conveyed but "[...] plugin looks other [...]" doesn't seem right.

Author: I don't see the referenced issue in the comment. Can you elaborate if it hasn't been addressed?

Reviewer: What I was trying to say is that this line reads strangely - specifically, the part about "the structure of this plugin looks other AaC plugins". Re-reading it, perhaps the intent is this:

```suggestion
Looking inside this directory, the structure of this plugin looks like other AaC plugins:
```

```markdown
.primitive_type_check
├── __init__.py
├── validators
   ├── __init__.py
   ├── bool_validator.py
   ├── date_validator.py
   ├── file_validator.py
   ├── int_validator.py
   └── num_validator.py
└── primitive_type_check.yaml
```

> So seeing the structure of this validator, there is an `init`, a number of implementations under `validators` and the `yaml` file used to describe the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Seeing the structure of this validator, there is an `init` module, there are a number of implementations in the `validators` package, and the `yaml` file used to describe the plugin.
```

```python
def validate_bool(definition: Definition, value_to_validate: Any) -> Optional[ValidatorFinding]:
    """
    Returns a Validation finding if the type isn't valid, otherwise None.
    This function is intended to be used in the Validation apparatus, and for this result
    to be collated with other finding into a larger ValidatorResult.
    Arge:
        definition (Definition): The definition that the value belongs to.
        value_to_validate (Any): The value to be tested.
    Returns:
        A ValidatorFinding if the value is not a boolean or None.
    """

    is_invalid = not isinstance(value_to_validate, bool)
    finding = None
    if is_invalid:
        lexeme, *_ = [lexeme for lexeme in definition.lexemes if lexeme.value.lower() == str(value_to_validate.lower())]
        finding_message = f"{value_to_validate} is not a valid value for boolean type {PRIMITIVE_TYPE_BOOL}."
        finding_location = FindingLocation.from_lexeme(BOOL_VALIDATION_NAME, lexeme)
        finding = ValidatorFinding(definition, FindingSeverity.ERROR, finding_message, finding_location)

    return finding
```

> The yaml for the plugin looks like any other plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The yaml for the plugin looks like any other plugin definition file:
```

            - The ValidatorInput content consists of valid AaC definitions
            - The ValidatorInput contains at least one definition field that is defined as being type `bool`
            - The value in the primitive `bool` field is a valid boolean YAML value
          when:
            - The input is validated
          then:
            - The ValidatorOutput does not indicate any errors
            - The ValidatorOutput does not indicate any warnings
            - The ValidatorOutput indicates the primitive value under test is valid
        - scenario: Fail to Validate an Integer Primitive Value Is a non-boolean String
          given:
            - The ValidatorInput content consists of AaC definitions
            - The ValidatorInput contains at least one definition field that is defined as being type `bool`
            - The value in the primitive `bool` field contains alphabetical letters or punctuation marks that don't represent a YAML boolean value
          when:
            - The input is validated
          then:
            - The ValidatorOutput indicates an error
            - The ValidatorOutput indicates the primitive value under test is invalid
    ...
```

> Lastly, in order to register the primitive validations, the `primitive-type-check` plugin uses the following plugin method `plugin.register_primitive_validations(...)` to register its several primitive validators:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, the `primitive-type-check` plugin uses the following `Plugin` method `plugin.register_primitive_validations(...)` to register its several primitive validators:
```
